.. vim: syntax=rst

.. http://rolandpuntaier.blogspot.co.at/2015/01/complex-numbers.html

.. {complex number}

(Complex) Numbers
-----------------

This is partly from my time as a teacher, when I made an 
*automatic exercise correcting, course building site* 
called `mamchecker <https://github.com/mamchecker/mamchecker>`_ 
based on google appengine.

I go through the different number sets in a not so standard way and
conclude with the complex numbers, which have always been fascinating to me,
because somehow enigmatic, not obvious, and then because useful and a good
example of mathematical thinking.

-----------------------------------------------------

**Natural Numbers** (`\mathbb{N}`) by themselves are a great abstraction. 
Forget about all qualities but the "how many", the *cardinality*.

Then, do we add apples or do we take them away? So the sign
was invented and the **Integers** (`\mathbb{Z}`). We write ``-2``,
but since this linear direction is a concept by itself,
we should write `2(-)`, that is 2 times `(-)`, like we write
`2 m` or `2 g`. And when we want to say three things (how many,
add or remove, what quantity), then we could write `2(-)g`.
We could also give `(-)` a name like `s` for *subtract* (remove) and then
we should also have `a` for *add*. But to have special signs (`-`, `+`),
not a letters, is a lot better. So these signs make 
the *add* and *subtract* operations part of the natural numbers, 
making them integers and operations. Instead of `2(-)` we write `-2`, but we should
still think of it as two times subtracting.
`+3-2` is a sequence of such operations, we could emphasize this by writing `+3,-2`.

The same reasoning we can do with `*` (multiplying) and its opposite `/` (dividing).
`*2` and `/2` are elements of the *rationals* (`\mathbb{Q}`). `*3/2*5` is a
sequence of such operations (`*3,/2,*5`).  Most computer programs don't
understand `*3/2*5` unless the initial `*` or `/` is omitted.  For `+` and `-` they do
understand.

Addition and subtraction are two elements of a set, i.e. of something we can
pick one exclusively at a time. I normally call such a thing a **variable** and
the pick a **value**.  This variable is often called after one value:
*Addition* = `\{+,-\}`.  Same for *Multiplication* = `\{*,/\}`.

When combining addition and multiplication in a sequence, we have also introduced 
a convention: multiplication before addition.
This operator precedence rule allows us to write `2*3+2*4` in one expression
instead of `a=2*3,b=2*4,a+b`.

To put multiplication first was a good choice. We have had multiplication above
when we wrote `2(-)` to emphasize what `-2` means.  There is something very
basic about **multiplication**: Whenever there are two variables, that have
nothing in common, that we can pick from independently, that are
**orthogonal**, we simple pick values independently and place them one after
the other. When we count the possibilities of combined picks we get `|A|*|B|`,
where `||` is the cardinality, the information content.  This is why we write
`ab` for the area of an `a\times b` rectangle and why physicists combine all
kinds of variables via multiplication.  These variables are extensive meaning
any value of it is a set. E.g. the length of a rectanble side is the set of all
its points or of all its unit stretches. I also call such variables quantities here.

Next come the **irrational numbers** (`\mathbb{I}`). For example no sequence of
multiplication and division with natural numbers will produce the diagonal from
the edge of a square (incommensurable, `\sqrt{2}`), but one can get as close as
wanted.  This is how they are defined: An irrational is an infinite sequence of
rationals.  In this sense **infinity** is an irrational.

Irrationals and rationals make up the **real numbers** (`\mathbb{R}`).
    
Several times numbers were augmented with new information. The same we do with 
to the real numbers to get to the **complex numbers**.
In a real number we have the number, multiplication operation (`*`, `/`)
and the linear direction (`+`, `-`). 
We normally first determine the quantity by comparing to a unit
(multiply e.g. meters) and then optionally add it (to 0 on default).

There is another concept, which we can introduce: **orthogonality**. This
"variable" contains `1` (normally omitted) for same direction and `i` for
*orthogonal* or turned by right angle `\pi/2`, counterclockwise by convention.
Turning a second time gives `i*i = -1`.  This solves `x^2+1=0`, starting from
which normally `i` is actually introduced. 
`2ia` is `2a` and orthogonal to the direction of `a`. 

`i` is called imaginary unit and `\mathbb{R}\times \{i\}` are called **imaginary
numbers**.  Along this reasoning one should have called them **orthogonal
numbers**. By addition they are independent/orthogonal to the real numbers.  
Together with the real numbers they make the **complex numbers** (`\mathbb{C}`)
Orthogonal means that all combinations are possible, which corresponds to a
2-dimensional (2D) plane, the **complex plane** or **Gauss number
plane**.

    `z = (a,b) = a + ib \in \mathbb{C}`

- a = Re(z) is the real part
- b = Im(z) is the imaginary part

These numbers are like 2D-vectors: 2 orthogonal directions that can be added independently.

There are three representations

- `z = a+ib`, i.e. via the components or
- `z = r(\cos\varphi + i\sin\varphi)` via modulus `r` and argument `\varphi`
  (angle, phase) in radiants.

Note that, by the trigonometric addition formulas, multiplication adds the
angles, i.e. multiplication leads to addition.  This gives a hint that there
could be a representation that has the angle in the exponent.  Developing
`\sin` and `\cos` into a Taylor series and comparing with the `e^x` series
leads to the **Euler Formula**:

.. math::

    e^{i\varphi}=\cos\varphi + i \sin\varphi


- `z=re^{i\varphi}` is the third way to represent complex numbers.

    - `\varphi = arg(z)` is the argument (phase) of z. 
    - `arg(yz)=arg(y)+arg(z)`
    - `arg(\frac{y}{z})=arg(y)-arg(z)`

About `\sin` and `\cos` we know that the period is `2\pi`, therefore this is
true for `e^{i\varphi}`.  The nth root divides the period up to `2n\pi` to
below `2\pi` and so we have `n` different roots.

.. math::

    z^{1/n}=r^{1/n}e^{i(\varphi/n+2k\pi/n)}

More generally: 

   In `\mathbb{C}` every polynomial of degree n has exactly n roots
   (**fundamental theorem of algebra**), if one counts the multiplicity 
   of roots. `\mathbb{C}` therefore is called **algebraically closed**.

This means that not only `x^2`, but every polynomial maps the whole
`\mathbb{C}` to the whole of `\mathbb{C}`. This closedness is important.
All operations are reversible. One can calculate freely.

`\bar{z}=re^{-i\varphi}=a-ib` is the complex conjugate of z.
`\bar{(z^n)}=\bar{z}^n`.  We know that there are two orthogonals. We've chosen
`i` to be one of them, so `-i` is the other.

`y\bar{z}` combines in itself *dot* product
(`Re(y\bar{z})=|y||z|\cos\Delta\varphi`) and *cross* product
(`Im(y\bar{z})=|y||z|\sin\Delta\varphi`). *dot* and *cross* are two aspects of
orthogonality (=combinability). *dot* being 0 means there is no dependence,
which is saying all combinations are possible, which means the combined
variable is of maximum cardinality (area, *cross*), i.e. a rectangle.  The
**conjugate** is important, because it produces the delta angle between `y` and
`z`. Angle again is another, i.e. third way of expressing dependence.
With `y\bar{z}` *dot*, *cross* and *angle* are beautifully combined.

`|z| = \sqrt{z\bar{z}} = \sqrt{a^2+b^2} = r` is the absolute value (modulus) of
`z`.  Here the imaginary part, the *cross* has gone, because there is no area
in between.  And why the `\sqrt{}`? Multiplication brought us to the combined
variable, but in this limit case of 0 angle any independent other variable 
has gone and thus we go back to the the length, the cardinality, the information 
of `z` alone. 

Why is the pythagorean theorem in there.  To understand this we need to
understand the fundamentals of the pythagorean theorem. There are two
orthogonal variables involved.  Let's name their units `j` and `k` instead of
`1` and `i` (m and s for length and time,...).  `z=z_1j+z_2k` is one value of the
combined variable. The very fundamental *dot* of `y` and `z` reduces
to the **dot** between `j` and `k` via `y\cdot
z=(y_1j+y_2k)\cdot(z_1j+z_2k)=y_1z_1j\cdot j+y_2z_2k\cdot k+y_1z_2j\cdot
k+y_2z_1k\cdot j`.  Now `j` and `k` are orthogonal, so `j\cdot k=k\cdot j=0`,
`j` and `j` are the same, thus `j\cdot j=1`.  Same with `k\cdot k = 1`.  What
we get is `y\cdot z=y_1z_1+y_2z_2`, which is the pythagorean theorem if `y=z`. 

*number* times *unit* is a special team: the quantity and the quality.  It is
also called a vector space.  If the number is complex, it is a vector space
over complex numbers. A vector can also subsume independent quantities, making
it of dimension n > 1.  A complex number z already has orthogonality. In a 2D
vector space of units `j` and `k` it should be `ij=k`, because there is no
other dimension. Actually something like this is done with `quaternions
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quaternion>`_.  But for a general 2D vector space
each component with `\mathbb{C}` becomes 2D itself.  So a nD vector space over
`\mathbb{C}` becomes kind of 2nD dimensional.  What `\mathbb{C}` does is to
allow specifying: can be added or cannot be added.  This is comparable to a
boolean.

To get the orthogonality, the *dot*, of two elements of such a 2D space over
`\mathbb{C}` we do `(uj+vk)\cdot(yj+zk)=u\cdot y + v\cdot z=u\bar{y}+v\bar{z}`,
i.e. we take the conjugates. We need because we know there is orthogonality in
a complex number and we've seen above how to deal with it. In general with
`r,s\in\mathbb{C}^n` the orthogonality is the real part of `r\cdot s=\sum{r_i\bar{s_i}}`.

-----------------------------------------------------

Now, do we need the complex numbers? Yes. 
The main reason is that orthogonality is a very important concept
and so complex numbers find application in many fields.
They make notation and calculation so much easier.

One essential point is the comparison of two quantities regarding addability.
If they are parallel they are addable, if they are orthogonal, they are not.
To this end paramters that have influence on addability,
can be mapped to an angle (phase), which with Euler's notation
of complex numbers, become a parallel (addable) and a orthogonal (not addable) part.

Examples: 

- The time `t` of a vibration becomes `\varphi=\frac{2\pi}{T}t` or 
  
- the `t`, `x` positions of a wave become `\varphi=\frac{2\pi}{\lambda}x+\frac{2\pi}{T}t`. 

`Re(Ae^{i\varphi})` then represents the addable amplitude.

