.. encoding: utf-8
.. vim: syntax=rst

.. https://rolandpuntaier.blogspot.com/2019/05/economy-as-dynamic-system.html

.. default-role:: math

*************************
Economy as Dynamic System
*************************

In `Evolution of dynamic systems`_ economics is mentioned as an example
and here this is elaborated on qualitatively.


Dynamic System
==============

`Free market`_ is based on elementary principles shared by every `dynamic system`_.
The elementary interaction of the `evolution of dynamic systems`_ is `selection`_,
which consists of

- variable (a set of selectable/distinguishable elements) = space
- value (selection from the variable) = time

In economic parlance, but without reducing abstractness, this is

- supply (of `resources`_, like alternative products) and 
- demand (selection from `competing`_ alternative products)

Like other dynamic systems, 
`economy`_ `diversifies`_ on top of long-lasting structures.
The interaction to buy a complex product like a smartphone,
is the top of a hierarchy of interactions.

The individual is the smallest entity considered in economy,
although interactions in the brain,
coming from `biological evolution`_ and `education`_,
are the foundation of human interaction.

Every encapsulation (subsystem, company, economic node) has interior selections,
which correspond to its inner energy.
The further down the hierarchy, the smaller the time steps.

Every level undergoes a **creative phase** (adding information)

- where `investments`_ create new resources (new products)
- to produce profit (net input)
- to create further resources

In a **selective phase** the subsystem optimizes (removing information)

- by filtering out products (variables) not getting momentum
- by reducing cost by changing the company's context
  (outsourcing, cooperation, change of product components, ...)
- to improve higher level contexts, especially those of people

This is `annealing`_ that produces macroeconomic evolution.

The internal of non-closed subsystem, where `input and output`_ of energy balance,
can keep the same internal cycle, as if closed.
With an internal `storage`_ a subsystem can acquire a more independent trajectory.
Input and output are interactions on the level of peer subsystems, 
like a physical system of interacting particles.

.. admonition:: microeconomy vs macroeconomy

    Understanding every node of economy from the two perspectives,

    - from inside (one node): `microeconomy`_
    - from outside (all nodes): `macroeconomy`_

    allows to find alternative interactions to counter unwanted developments
    according to `needs`_, `personality`_ and `ethical values`_.

Valuing Resources
=================

`Resource`_, `product`_, `service`_ or `good`_  are all comprised in the hypernym *variable*
when regarding economy as a dynamic system.

The physical energy of economy ultimately comes from the sun,
that feeds us via the `food chain`_,
but due to economic `diversification`_ the connection is not direct any more.

A **resource** is (the source of) something 
that satisfies a human need (`Maslow pyramid`_).
The higher needs are there to protect the lower needs.
How well the sum of all needs is satisfied determines the `living standard`_.
Availability of resources is `wealth`_.

One resource is one degree of freedom:
All `products`_ satisfying the same need
form the supply of a resource to the `market`_ (= those interested).

A resource is an extensive variable.
An extensive variable is a variable, where

- each value is a set with a
- `measure`_ defined

The measure usually is **money** using a currency as unit.
Although, a high percentage of economy is measured

- not at all
- not in detail
- with a local measure

In `bartering`_ the measure is a possibly ad hoc unit of another resource.
Through `trading`_ different measures will acquire an `exchange rate`_.
Here money stands for any measure, local or global.

`Valuing`_ (`pricing`_) a product 

- can be done directly through `bargaining`_, or else
- is a collective (market) process by `supply and demand`_

`Pricing`_ on the supply side is based on 

- `production cost`_
- `strategic`_ anticipation of customer valuing, to `maximize profit`_

Valuing on the demand side (= market) is a mix of 

- `taste`_
- `utility`_ or `marginal utility`_
- `competition`_ and
- available money

Initial pricing of a new product will get adjusted by the market over time,
as a compromise between people's individual valuing.
Very different valuing groups will split the market, e.g. in poor and rich market.

For small markets (e.g. team, family)
the valuing compromise is too burdensome, and prone to conflict.

Valuing changes over economic evolution as new (types of) resources emerge.

Comparison to Physics
=====================

There is a layer of complicated emotional and/or rational decision making
between the physical world and economy
before any economic selection happens.

In physics the 

- number of selections per cycle is **action** (information) and
- the selections per time is **energy**

The selections are observed at a space point `x`, consisting of more components.
So the energy `V` is associated to the location: `V(x)`.
The change of a component is a **momentum**.
Simultaneous elementary momenta, summarized via `p`, determine a `ΔV(x)=V(x+Δx)-V(x)`.
Via bookkeeping energy thus associates a kinetic energy change `ΔK` to `p`: `ΔK(p)-ΔV(x)=0`.

The following mathematical analogy to physics is to be understood qualitatively.

Economy's *key difference* to physics is

- energy is *not directly* given by selections per time
- but there is a `valuing`_ of the selections,
  different for every resource `i` and at every location `x`: `V_i(x)`

:time: `Transactions`_

Selections are `transactions`_ and happen in space and time.
They define economic space and time.
Via comparison to physical space and time we get

- momentum when looking at one resource (space, momentum)
- energy when combining selections per physical time step (time, energy)

:space: `resources`_

Resources form a many-dimensional space.
A physical **location** `x` corresponds to:

- `assets`_
- `means of production`_ (methods, tools, ...) not traded
- links to other companies
- ...

Resources are linked to physical time and space,
e.g. natural resources are localized, 
crops grow better where and when there is sun and water.
  
:momentum: `Transactions`_ of one resource.

`Transactions`_ of a unit `d x_i` of a resource `x_i` 
per time `dt` for a `price`_ `m_i`
along an established link between two agents:

.. math::

   p_i = m_i v_i(t) \\
   v_i = \frac{d x_i(t)}{dt}

`p_i` do not mix in an `euclidian`_ way, but mostly `linearly`_: `p = \sum p_i`.

If product `i` is composed of `x^j` units of product `j` with unit price `P_{ij}`,
then one `p_i` transaction is "simultaneous" with the according `p_j` transactions.

.. math::

    p_i = \sum_j P_{ij}x^j


All `p={p_i}` together are `operations`_, describing which products are transacted.

:mass: `price`_

The price `m_i` corresponds to mass in physics,
but different for every product `i`.

.. math::

   p_i = \frac{d}{dt}∫dI(x_i) = m_i\frac{d}{dt}∫dx_i = m_i v_i(t)

It considers

- lower level selections with `pricing`_ strategies
- a mutual cost of selection (`transaction cost`_)

One `transaction cost`_ comes from establishing links between agents for the resource.
From the sellers side it is `advertisement`_,
from the buyers side `filtering`_ out the right product, despite ads.
The economic links can be accounted to a company's `goodwill`_.

.. admonition:: search vs ads

   A strategy of `advertisement`_ is to select everybody.
   But with so many products it becomes a `nuisance`_.
   Even `targeted`_ ads never turn up at the right time.
   But they still `anchor`_ and `frame`_.
   `Findability`_ is preferable,
   best through dedicated unbiased product comparison sites,
   as `paid inclusion`_ in `search engines`_ are flawed by a `bias`_.

:velocity: `demand`_

Like physical mass, prices `m_i` can depend on `velocity`_ `v_i`:
inverse `demand function`_, `price elasticity`_ .

| A negative `v_i` codes expenses (`cost`_)
| A positive `v_i` codes `revenue`_ (`sales`_, `wages`_ or `salary`_,...)

`v_i` is expressed in a product specific unit.
It could be expressed relative to a maximum production `capacity`_ `c_i`.

`phase space`_: economic context

Time `t` links momentum `p_i` with space `x_i`.
The **economic context** at time `t` is given by both `p_i` and `x_i`.
With constant (input and output of) energy,
`(x_i,p_i)` will cycle more or less the same way.

:action: `economic value`_ 

The accumulated `economic value`_  `I(x)=∫dI(x)`
is the result of a `valuation`_ process.

For a product this is the price.

For a company valuation happens annually via `financial statements`_.
`I(x)` at a point in time `t` is given by the `balance sheet`_

- once split by category (`assets`_)
- once by ownership (`liabilities`_ and owner's `equity`_)

The `balance sheet`_ includes the results of `operations`_:

- by category: `cash`, `accounts receivable`_ and `accounts payable`_ 
  for unfinished `transactions`_
- by ownership: `retained earnings`_ under owner's `equity`_ to sum up 
  finished `transactions`_ of the separate `income statement`_

Changes of `balance sheet`_ with regard to the last `fiscal year`_ are in the `cash flow statement`_.

`Accounting`_ throughout the year considers finer details of value flow (energy),
associated with many sub-accounts (subsystems).

:energy: `economic growth`_ 

`Operations`_ `p(t)` represents the **kinetic energy** `K(p(t))=p(t)` of a company.
They are `input and output`_ and summarized in the `income statement`_.
Summing over a `fiscal year`_ gives `profit`_ `P = ∫p(t)dt`.
It is loss, if negative.

`V(x(t)) = dI(x(t))/dt` can be seen as **potential energy**
(`Current assets`_, `non-current assets`_ in the `balance sheet`_).

`H(x,p) = V(x(t))+K(p(t))` is the total change of `value of a company`_
(`GDP`_ macroeconomically for a country).

`H=0`: Without input `V = -K`, i.e. operations change the company value or vice versa.
`V = dI(x)/dt = ∂I(x)/∂x_i d x_i/dt = -Σ m_i v_i = Σ p_i = -p(t) = -K`.

`H>0` is the default, 
because people produce a net input through `p(t)`.

`Economic growth`_  rate `g` gives the relative change of growth.
`g` is normally positive, but not constant.
With a modified `\bar{g}` as `CAGR`_ it is still `exponential growth`_ on the average.

.. math::

    \frac{dH}{dt} = \bar{g} H \Rightarrow \\
    H(t) = H_0 e^{\bar{g} t} \\
    I(t) = \frac{H_0}{\bar{g}} e^{\bar{g} t} 

The human-valued driving **force** of a company (and thus of economy as a whole)
is to improve the value of context `x`
ultimately for the purpose of improving the context of people
according their `values`_: `-dV(x)/dx = F`

By analysing the context,
simulating variations and valuing them to be better,
a change towards the new context,
according to simulated plan, *will* be better.
So the `value of a company`_ will increase in normal conditions: 

.. math::

   g > 0

Company products offered to the market `compete`_ with products from other companies.
Price, `perceived quality`_, `advertisment manipulations`_ are competition factors.
If the `market value`_ does not cover the investment the company either adapts or
`dies in an orderly way`_.
Still, on average, i.e. from a macroeconomic perspective `g > 0`,
and this is what an average company in the market can expect, too.

This table summarizes the correspondence between physics and economy.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 80
   :header-rows: 1


   * - Physics
     - Economy

   * - mass (inner selections)
     - price

   * - time (selection)
     - any selling/buying event: `transaction`_ 

   * - space
     - very high dimensional economic context

       - every product type a variable
       - every product a value

   * - momentum
     - profit

   * - action (information)
     - `economic value`_, not equal to profit

   * - energy (information per time)
     - `economic growth`_

Structural Evolution
====================

Structural evolution produces higher level resources
through improvements on top of longer living lower level resources.
Every `invention`_ `x_i` (usage of new resource) 
can be considered an **evolution time** step
in the `metaspace`_ of product types.
Every invention is a `paradigm shift`_ 
that changes `x={x_i}` and `p={p_i}`.

`d x` is the addition of a resource `x_i` and 
`d p` are the transactions for `i`: `p_i`.

`d x` and `d p` are independent:

- `d x` is structural: adding variable
- `d p` is dynamic: selecting values of the new variable

The valuing `I` is local.
If a product `i` has more potential at the side (`x+x_i=x+Δx`) of customer `c`,
than given by the market price, 
transactions `i` start to make up `ṗ_i`:  `(I_c(x)-I_c(x+Δx))/Δx = F_i = ṗ_i = m_i ẍ_i`.

The value element `d p d x` is `activation value`_.
The total value is:

.. math::

   I(x,p) =  ∬ d p d x

This entails an average growth `H = I/T = m v^2 / 2` in time `T`,
assuming an average constant `m`,
which is true for prices and wages `only considering inflation`_.

`Hamilton-Jacobi`_ equations:

- `\frac{∂I}{∂t}=-H`

  Structural change is growth through investment `-H`.

- `\frac{∂I}{∂x}=p`

  A move to a new context involves selections.

`Newton second law`_, using `Hamilton equations`_:

- `F=∂H(p,x)/∂x=ṗ` 

  A change in growth through structural change implies a change in profit.

- `∂H(p,x)/∂p=-ẋ`

  Growth change through profit change implies structural change, like simplifications.

`Symmetry`_:

- space symmetry: there are `x` changes that keep `p` constant

- time symmetry: there are simultaneous `x` and `p` changes that keep `H` constant
  A company who's value is kept constant via balancing input and output.

During `operations`_ the company cycles through the phase points `(x,p)`.
With `input and output`_ balancing, this can be compared to circular motion.
Growth `H=∬dI dω` is an accumulation of structure `I` times `angular velocity`_ `ω=2πf = 2π/T`.
As the cycle time can vary between companies *or projects*,
instead of time one uses `action angle`_ `w`, a kind of `phase`_.
With constant cycle frequency `ω` we have `w(t) = ωt`.


.. _`action angle`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action-angle_coordinates
.. _`microeconomy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microeconomics
.. _`macroeconomy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macroeconomics
.. _`selection`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_selection
.. _`evolution of dynamic systems`: https://rolandpuntaier.blogspot.com/2019/01/evolution.html
.. _`values`: `ethical value`_
.. _`ethical values`: `ethical value`_
.. _`ethical value`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_(ethics)
.. _`compete`: `competition`_
.. _`competing`: `competition`_
.. _`resource`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource
.. _`dynamic system`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamical_system
.. _`service`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service_(economics)
.. _`good`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goods
.. _`education`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Education
.. _`biological evolution`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution
.. _`diversifies`: `diversification`_
.. _`diversification`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetic_divergence
.. _`personality`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personality
.. _`economy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economy
.. _`food chain`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Food_chain
.. _`wealth`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wealth
.. _`valuing`: `economic value`_
.. _`economic value`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_(economics)
.. _`utility`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utility
.. _`taste`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taste_(sociology)
.. _`maximize profit`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Profit_maximization
.. _`bargaining`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bargaining
.. _`marginal utility`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_utility
.. _`exchange rate`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exchange_rate
.. _`trading`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trade
.. _`transaction`: `transactions`_
.. _`transactions`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_transaction
.. _`bartering`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barter
.. _`competition`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Competition
.. _`living standard`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_of_living
.. _`cost`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cost
.. _`products`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product_(business)
.. _`price`: `pricing`_
.. _`pricing`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pricing
.. _`supply and demand`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supply_and_demand
.. _`information`: http://rolandpuntaier.blogspot.com/2015/03/what-is-information.html
.. _`measure`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Measure_(mathematics)
.. _`needs`: `Maslow pyramid`_
.. _`Maslow pyramid`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maslow%27s_hierarchy_of_needs
.. _`bias`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bias
.. _`search engines`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_search_engine
.. _`paid inclusion`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paid_inclusion
.. _`filtering`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Broadbent%27s_filter_model_of_attention
.. _`targeted`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Targeted_advertising
.. _`nuisance`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criticism_of_advertising
.. _`frame`: `media`_
.. _`media`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Framing_(social_sciences)
.. _`inequality`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_inequality
.. _`cooperations`: `cooperation`_
.. _`cooperation`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Co-operation_(evolution)
.. _`symmetry`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symmetry_(physics)
.. _`input and output`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Input%E2%80%93output_model
.. _`market`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_(economics)
.. _`wages`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wage
.. _`salary`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salary
.. _`Newton second law`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton%27s_laws_of_motion
.. _`Hamilton equations`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamiltonian_mechanics
.. _`investments`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Investment
.. _`transaction cost`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transaction_cost
.. _`revenue`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Revenue
.. _`sales`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sales
.. _`means of production`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Means_of_production
.. _`profit`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Profit_(accounting)
.. _`assets`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asset
.. _`balance sheet`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balance_sheet
.. _`income statement`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Income_statement
.. _`financial statements`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_statement
.. _`storage`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_storage
.. _`velocity`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ABC_analysis
.. _`goodwill`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodwill_(accounting)
.. _`euclidian`: http://mathworld.wolfram.com/EuclideanMetric.html
.. _`linearly`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taxicab_geometry
.. _`demand`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demand
.. _`annealing`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simulated_annealing
.. _`advertisment manipulations`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_manipulation
.. _`perceived quality`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quality_(business)
.. _`dies in an orderly way`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquidation
.. _`market value`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_value
.. _`GDP`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gross_domestic_product
.. _`exponential growth`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_growth
.. _`CAGR`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compound_annual_growth_rate
.. _`valuation`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valuation_(finance)
.. _`accounts payable`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accounts_payable
.. _`accounts receivable`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accounts_receivable
.. _`equity`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equity_(finance)
.. _`cash flow statement`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cash_flow_statement
.. _`operations`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_operations
.. _`current assets`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Current_asset
.. _`non-current assets`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fixed_asset
.. _`fiscal year`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiscal_year
.. _`production cost`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cost_of_goods_sold#Cost_of_goods_made_by_the_business
.. _`liabilities`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balance_sheet#Liabilities
.. _`resources`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource
.. _`findability`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Findability
.. _`anchor`: https://en.wikiped``ia.org/wiki/Anchoring
.. _`phase space`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_space
.. _`invention`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Invention
.. _`capacity`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capacity_planning
.. _`metaspace`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meta
.. _`paradigm shift`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradigm_shift
.. _`demand function`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse_demand_function
.. _`price elasticity`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Price_elasticity_of_demand
.. _`strategic`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aggregative_game
.. _`only considering inflation`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_wages
.. _`activation value`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Activation_energy
.. _`phase`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_(waves)
.. _`angular velocity`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular_velocity
.. _`moment of inertia`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moment_of_inertia
.. _`economic growth`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_growth
.. _`advertisement`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advertisement
.. _`retained earnings`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retained_earnings
.. _`value of a company`: https://rolandpuntaier.blogspot.com/2019/02/economy.html
.. _`Hamilton-Jacobi`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamilton%E2%80%93Jacobi_equation
.. _`Free market`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_market
.. _`product`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product_(business)
.. _`accounting`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accounting
