.. encoding: utf-8
.. vim: syntax=rst

.. https://rolandpuntaier.blogspot.com/2019/05/employmentinequality.html

.. default-role:: math

*******************
Economic Inequality
*******************

The `economy blog`_ makes economy an example of a dynamic system,
that works according the laws of evolution: creation and selection.

The major purpose of economy as a whole is 

- to produce resources (creation)
- to distribute resources (selection)

Accordingly there are two important measures of economy's structures.

- `productivity`_
- good distribution, but measured by its opposite `inequality metric`_.

This blog is about the latter.

`Employment`_ is a major reason for `inequality`_,

- politically, due to a power hierarchy in companies
  (losing `honor`_, `free will`_)

- economically, also due to the power hierarchy and
  by renouncing the true `value of a company`_

For fair distribution, `cooperation`_ needs to be paired with ownership:

.. note:: Those cooperating hold a share of the cooperation.

In high-tech, the valuable economic resource is not land or raw material, but `cooperation`_.
Cooperation produces `productivity`_.
`Cooperation`_ restricts freedom, but we have it in our genes,
because it was needed to secure resources where we evolutionarily grew up.

In addition to fair resource distribution (increase `freedom of choice`_)
an objective of cooperation should be to reduce coupling (increase `free will`_),
enabling to work more cooperatively than `collaboratively`_.

During `employment`_ a person can not choose what work to do for what pay,
thus `employment`_ is not evolutionary.
The employee cannot `maximize profit`_, while the company can.

There are examples of `employee-owned`_ companies, but they are still a minority.
To a certain extend this is due to the lack of communication infrastructure,
which step-by-step becomes available just now.
With the internet, `mass collaboration`_ software, new possibilities emerge,
also to create more fairness.

`Evolution`_ needs a creative phase, an `activation energy`_, an investment,
which offers fair cooperation.
Pursuit of one's `self-interest`_ has no meaning without choice.

- *First* an alternative economic network needs to be offered,
  with either
  
  - shared ownership or
  - `transaction`_-like, but
  - without employment relations and
  - without power concentration

- Then enough people in `self-employment`_ within the network
  can create a critical mass
  that takes away employees from undemocratic, exploiting companies.

This is necessary to meet fair distribution and not only productivity.

The objective is no `ideological`_ fixation, but alternatives.

A social or economic structure can be seen invertedly as subsystem to one of its members.
People select collectively what structure survives.
Since there are people of different types, more structures can survive.
In an evolutionary sense, good is what survives.
Those cooperating need to understand that they have a say
about what structures, i.e. what kind of company they want.

Economy of Emotions
===================

Economics is a rational science
that uses a lot of mathematics based on `economic models`_.

Rational economic models do not contradict the fact,
that economy is also built on emotions,
a feature of the human animal 
acquired through `biological evolution`_.
We use to contrast emotions with rationality,
but emotions are the rationality of a far longer evolutionary history.

Economy is a `cooperation`_ to satisfy our needs,
that evolved over `biological evolution`_,
and are averaged by the `Maslow pyramid`_.

Emotions are the psychological and physiological algorithms
developed by biological evolution 
to safeguard various kinds of resources.
These algorithms are encoded in the human genome.

- We *love* because of our offspring's dependence on the resources of both parents
- We love our parents to provide resources
- We feel at ease and *loyal*, if accepted by a group as a security on resources
- We *fear* a threat on our resources
- We become *envious or jealous* on unfair distribution of resources
- We develop *anger* to prepare our body to defend resources
- We become *sad* when we realize a resource is lost

.. note:: Dependence on resources is the evolutionary cause of emotions.

That emotions `long predate`_ the dawn of mankind is proven by

- our sharing of emotions with other mammals
- the fact that emotions produce physiological reactions

Some animals prefer a `solitary`_ life to avoid
the stress of `intraspecific`_ `biological competition`_.
Other animal live `socially`_, among them the `humans`_.

Humans show `emotional evidence`_ of a long evolutionary history of group life.
Many emotions predate `eusociality`_ of humans, but acquired a social trigger.
Emotions can be `contagious`_. We have `empathy`_.

Emotions `co-evolved`_, e.g.
a social anxiety, like stage fright, possibly co-evolved
with the envy at someone who plays important and 
demands an unjustified bigger share of limited resources.

Group emotions are in our genes,
because of the dependence of individuals on the group.
The group is an essential subsystem to the individual.
Genes producing behavior destructive for the group
decreased the gene-holder's chances to survive.
It is still `selection`_ on the individual via `inclusive fitness`_
rather than `selection of groups`_.

Group emotions constitute a macroeconomic view, 
which considers the importance of the group.
That they evolved shows their usefulness and
advices us not to base the economy purely on `egoistic`_ motives.

There are also emotional differences between humans:

- Different strategies allowed survival,
  e.g Some people evolutionarily satisfied their needs via relations,
  while others did it more directly.

- Different environments selected differently.
  In the presence of resource `scarcity`_,

  - environments where resources could be obtained alone lead to more competitiveness
  - environments where resources needed cooperation lead to more cooperativeness

As a result we can classify two `stereotypes`_

- those who are interested in things (more `introvert`_) and 
- those who are interested in people (more `extrovert`_)

with every shade in between.

The extrovert will likely 

- pay attention to what the others want, think or believe and
- behave accordingly
- `groom`_ them
- accept a hierarchy
- try to get a better place in the hierarchy

because he evolutionarily got his resources indirectly.

The introvert will 

- spend less time in `social grooming`_,
- because his time is consumed with learning new things.
- He teams up with people of the same interest and
- will see other off-topic grooming more as a nuisance or insincere.
- He will not like hierarchies, especially none above,
  because they take away his freedom to explore new things.

Human emotional peculiarities were shaped in the long
`prehistory`_ of small groups more then in the short written `history`_.
We still feel well in teams that model such **natural companies**.
They put each member at ease with mutual appreciation for 

- the help in acquiring and
- fairly distributing resources

The natural companies evolved to fit together and to the environment.
Extroverts and introverts complemented each other in the natural company.

Emotions demand respect, because grown and proven over a hundred million years.
Those who didn't have these emotions do not exist any more.
The lack of respect leads to destructive behavior of individuals or groups,
which can become disruptive or destructive for larger social systems.

Legal Company
=============

A company as a `legal entity`_ is no such natural company.
It rather can be compared to an **interface** in programming.
Economic exchange goes through the (address, `role`_) tuples of a company.
The company plays external roles in the economy
independent of who provides its function, i.e. the internal roles.

The `entity`_ 

- makes contracts and
- is legally responsible for them,
- economically spends and earns and
- is taxable for the profit

as a separate unit.

`Legal entity types`_ provide useful constructs for people working together,

- not making everybody liable for the actions of the others (`limited liability`_)
- guaranteeing fair distribution between `partners`_ or owners

but are mostly abused for exploitation 
of the inherited capability 
to form a natural company
and achieve great things by working together.

The problematic internal role is the **employee** role, because employees

- provide the full functionality of a company
- but do get only a minor portion of their achievement

The owners

- have considerably better legal protection
- have power over the employees
- controls the money flow through the addresses of the company

Owner vs employee inequality obviously produces also distribution inequality.

Ownership
=========

`Property`_ is a claim (`ownership`_)
on resources, because of a dependence on these resources.
This `territorial claim`_ we share with other animal.
Marriage can be regarded as such a claim, too.

Because of the importance of property in human history,
society has developed special protection for it.
An owner can therefore sit back and 
do without constant emotional stress to defend his claim.

When people started to rely on farming,
land became an essential resource 
and thus people claimed ownership on land.
Farmers were raided, though,
and fell prey to `protection rackets`_.
The racketeers became the authorities (monarchs),
claiming taxing rights on their territories (nowadays countries).

There are properties in all levels of society up to a state's `territory`_.

Property is heritable and
whether acquired fairly, violently or by tricks, gets forgotten.
Society's protection of property stays, though.

Nowadays very few depend on farming.
Mostly we depend on **cooperation** to create and maintain
technically complex systems, like computer HW and SW, cars, robots, ...
Consequently the important resources of today and the future are companies,
the cooperation of people.

To improve distribution of wealth 
one must aim at a fair distribution of company ownership.

To own `shares`_ of other companies is possible,
but even `public float`_ is in principle nothing else
than a direct owner of the `corporation`_.

- The owners or managers have control over the employees.
- The owners or managers can maximize profit, the employees cannot.

The problem leading to inequality is not that `companies are owned`_,
but that they are not sharedly owned by those working there, the employees.

The corporation is legally obliged to maximize profit for the owner(s),
this conflicts with maximizing the profit of the employee
and is a legal unfairness.

.. admonition:: Maximizing Profit

   In principle, there is nothing wrong with `profit maximization`_.
   The problem is only the employment role,
   because it does not allow to take the best deals while in employment.
   By law, the employee is controlled by the employer.
   Because the majority of people are employees and thus cannot take part in the game,
   employment is a problem.

The idea that work is a product like any other, that you can buy,
might be OK for `physics work`_,
but when people work together for a longer time,
they organize and create value beyond lifting a weight.

Especially highly educated technical people should avoid employment,
because they produce immense innovation, like `automation`_
and `artificial intelligence`_.
If those who own the cooperation get all the profit,
instead of those cooperating,
this creates an unbelievable inequality.
It has done so already and will do more so in the future 
by orders of magnitude
unless the employment relation is avoided.

The employee is regarded as working or thinking machine, a slave.
Seen from the `investor`_ or `owner`_,
the `productivity`_ of slavery is high
(slave = little cost = little input, but high value output).
But overall the productivity is low,
because only a few do actual work,
while the others live on managing 
the actual value produced by the few working,
independent of whether `public float`_ or majority `stock`_ holders
or direct owner.

- With `public float`_ small shareholders waste time 
  gathering information about the company they hold a few shares of or they
  delegate to `bullshit-jobs`_ in `managed`_ `funds`_.

- Majority `stock`_ holders or direct owners get too rich.

A super rich person does not live a million lives
and does not have a million thoughts in every instant.
So he spends the money only according to his very limited mind,
thus curbing economic evolution.

He creates `bullshit-jobs`_ 
in the `finance industry`_, `management hierarchy`_
and `legal industry`_
to report to his bottleneck mind,
which makes the overall `productivity`_ small again.

It is not a goal of the many, the economy,
to be productive for an owner.
This is only the goal of the few rich.
The goal of the economy as a whole is
to spread freedom to let choose according to individual `needs`_ and `interests`_.
For this, people need to have their own money
and not be the lackey of some owner.

.. admonition:: Freedom

   A person with own thoughts needs
   freedom for his own plans.

   Free choices are not possible without resouces,
   without alternatives to choose from.

   Freedom needs both:

   - `free will`_ and 
   - `freedom of choice`_.

   It is `extortion`_, if `economic value`_ 
   cannot be obtained by `free will`_,
   but only under an employer's `commands`_.

   Then the employee does not get 
   its fair share of the actual `value of a company`_
   and thus renounces `freedom of choice`_.

   One has effectively become a slave, if one has no alternatives
   that make a difference in the pursuit of one's `self-interest`_.

   Concentration of wealth is a *vicious circle* that 
   sucks away freedom from the majority.

Importance of Fairness
======================

Employee ownership brings democracy into the companies.

Currently companies resemble

- `dictatorship`_
- `centrally planned economy`_ like in `communism`_

where one or a few decide over others.

But also with `workplace democracy`_ inequality still can creep in.

A sense of fairness for `distributive justice`_ or equality
is part of our `emotions`_ and of society's `ethical values`_.

Fairness is local to a cooperation, because it is associated with **information**.
One needs to **demand information** to be able to judge fairness.

.. admonition:: Information

   Hiding information is the major means of exploitation.

Being political is a necessity.

When working together one cannot split

- politics: decision making
- economics: fair distribution

`Politics`_ applies to all social structures, not just countries.

We are still animals, but animals with a intellect,
that can design and commit to a social structure
other than `alpha, beta, omega`_,
also because `communication`_ has become more flexible.

To overcome a subjective feeling of fairness 
one needs to compromise on a metric.
As is common with measuring, as hard as one tries,
there will always be an error.
Accordingly there will never be perfect fairness.

The sum of everybody demanding fairness in their local contexts (`microeconomy`_),
produces more equality, also globally (`macroeconomy`_), e.g. in a country.
Non-local inequality between companies will be leveled by

- a normal healthy competition.
- government `redistribution`_

The problem, though, is to make enough people aware of their `marginal`_ importance
in reducing inequality.
Economies, where enough people exit unfair companies, do better,
because a fairer distribution makes an economy grow.

The economy is driven by demand, i.e. needs.
Making one person super rich does not increase the demand,
because a person's needs are more or less limited.
Thus, from a macroeconomic viewpoint,

- concentrating resources means `recession`_
- distributing resources means `economic growth`_

**Distributing wealth** also

- makes people financially independent
- spreads freedom (alternatives), which
- leads to more diversification
- makes the economy resistant against financial crises
- makes people happier
- protects against social upheaval
- gives a say to many instead of a few

A financial crises is reached when the limit of exploitation is reached.
A good example is the `2007-2008 crisis`_.
The rich need to invest, which means that the poor need to incur debt.

The way via fairer laws is often not taken,
because the minority, that profits from `inequality`_,
has a disproportionate influence on politicians
and `frame`_ the public via `mass media`_.
(`obedience`_, `work ethic`_, `virtue`_, ..., `religion`_, ...).

In a democracy,
why aren't their any politicians that promise to end `inequality`_?
There are, but only when `inequality`_ reaches a critical level for a critical mass.
This is then a revolution, which operates outside the laws, 
and is a threat to life of many and thus the ultimate resort.
History shows, when a critical `inequality`_ has been reached,

- a financial crisis occurs
- some leader tells the poor,
  that their misery can be ended by conquering new resources via war
- people revolt(
  `Slave Rebellions`_
  `French Revolution`_
  `October Revolution`_
  `WWII`_)

These are just the last stages of a long period of preceding suffering.
The rich, though, don't experience the suffering and don't see it either.
The initiative therefore can only come from those suffering.

Considering the inertia of large systems,
there is a point of no return, which one cannot detect.
Instead one needs to counteract every local `inequality`_.

Inequality is a world problem,
not of countries existing due to historical coincidences.

Employment Disadvantages
========================

- Owner vs employees produces `inequality`_.

The most obvious cause for `inequality`_
is company **owner versus employee**.
Working as employees has produced an unbelievable `wealth inequality`_,
because they did not claim ownership of their cooperation.

On a settled market employee's `P_e = w` versus owner's `P_o = r N w`
(`w` wage investment, return on investment (`ROI`_) `r`, `N` employees)
produces a minimal linear `inequality`_ growth `\text{MLD}=ln(r+1)t`,
where MLD is `mean log deviation`_ as `inequality metric`_.

Best would be `r=0`.
Then the price of labour meets the profit of the company 
and `inequality`_ does not rise.
This is the case when those working together also own their cooperation.
Because the exploiting separate owner role is gone.

The above `r` is for one company. 
Between companies inequality can still increase.
But then work force would move to the profitable business
to level it again.
This is normal healthy competition and not due to power hierarchy.

- Employees renounce the market value of an established company.

The `value of a company`_ is to a big part of structural nature,
internal and in market position.

The ownership of many `legal entity types`_ is established at the beginning
with no change during the growth of a company.
Every new employee's contribution to the value of the company
(profit per employee, intellectual property, structural value,...)
is claimed by the same owners,
basically all accumulated `economic value`_ of the company.

Wealth `grows exponentially`_
by averaging `compound interest`_ (stochastic model: `geometric brownian motion`_).
This is the wealth of the owners produced by the employees.
The wages of employees, on the other hand,
settle on a level to be just enough, to make a living.

- Employees miss opportunities.

An employee is compensated via `wages`_ determined by the separate `labor market`_
instead of according to the profit in the product market.

- Price of labor (wage) does not reflect profit.

Without a say in the company via ownership, wages can basically only be influenced via `strikes`_.
The owner has more possibilities in an `imperfect competition`_, 
the simplest being to `increase the price`_, which has the extra profit,
that the ensuing `inflation`_ is not immediately reflected in the `wages`_.

`Employment`_ is a cooperation with only a few winners and many losers.

- Employees cannot `maximize profit`_, while the company can.
- Employees create the company profit, but an owner might still think, he pays the wages.
- Employees create the company's links to the economy, but lose them all at once when leaving.
- Employees cannot decide for themselves, even if they know better.
- Employees cannot organize their environment according to their needs,
  but are placed in loud crowded big `open offices`_.
- Employees are not included in decision processes that have an impact on them (especially wages).
- Employees get deprived of their intellectual property.
- Employees do not get a share of the company matching their relative investment.
- Employees sell their full time for an unfair price as if they had no goals of their own.
  They give up their personal development.
- Employees are unprotected against the many causes of loosing their job, their work investment.
- The dependent work without rights is coercing an employee to obey.
- Employment is `coercive`_ and conflicts with the `Universal Declaration of Human Rights`_:

  | ... equal in dignity and rights.
  | ... should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
  | ... right to life, liberty and security of person 
  | ... right to own property
  | No one shall be subject to ... degrading treatment ...

- Employment is not an evolutionary context. Employees cannot decide 

  - what to offer (what work to do)
  - for what price (what pay)
  
  There would need to be an internal market with free decision making.
  Market encapsulations do make sense, because they reduce the `selection cost`_.

If an employee voluntarily or involuntarily leaves a company he helped build,
he loses the `value of the company`_, especially its market position.
The `owner`_ role protects him against such losses.

.. admonition:: Employees are the losers.

   If you take a job, the employer wins, you lose.
   Shouldn't you better `hide`_ from employment?
   It is a question of organizing alternatives.

.. admonition:: Technology and science people psychology

   Tech people on the average are people
   that are more interested in things, called introverts above.
   They don't like hierarchy and have
   a hard time accepting the owner vs employee `discrimination`_.

   The manager should be

   - a highly skilled technical guy himself and
   - wise and empathetic enough not to remind the hierarchy

   A power hierarchy leads to

   - `intra-group`_ competition for higher and more profitable roles or
   - power-based instead of knowledge-based decisions 

   This is `occupational stress`_ to tech people.

   If the tech people own their cooperation, the resulting `meritocracy`_
   produces a better feedback 

   - not only via resources, but also
   - via mutual appreciation, resulting in better `self-esteem`_

   Costly `employment turnover`_ is avoided,
   as ownership binds people to the company
   and secures their links to the market.

Jurisdiction's Negligence
=========================

Laws are historically grown rules
which mix the goals and ideas of many but especially rich people.
As such they are neither moral nor immoral, but amoral.

In our context `immoral`_ is 

- unequal profit
- subordination

It is immoral to own the cooperation of people, 
*Those cooperating hold a share of the cooperation*, simply by logic.
Employment is immoral.

.. note:: Those cooperating hold a share of the cooperation.

`Inequality`_ in general is immoral, as those with no wealth must work for the wealthy.

Jurisdictions do little against inequality,
A jurisdiction's goal is more to keep continuity for those with influence
than to care for equality.

To a large part, company ownership today is a continuation
of wealth distribution that is many centuries old.
`Employment`_ is a continuation of `slavery`_ or `feudalism`_.
The rich always had, and still have, a big influence on jurisdictions
and were able to maintain laws that allowed them to continue their exploitation.

Jurisdiction care for equal treatment of partners and owners,
but treat the employees as inferior roles.

Without protection from law, simply by tradition,
employees can expect `unfair`_ `contracts`_

- that produce `inequality`_ with respect to the company
- that put them in a subordinate role

Actually subordination is in the `employment contract`_ by law.
How to make a majority avoid the employment role that is immoral by law?
How to make a majority more suspicious and political?

Since schools are mostly state-controlled,
they do not prepare to think politically and economically,
leaving them quite exposed to exploitation.

A slave becomes a respectable person, an economic `entity`_ instead of a economic resource,

- if his will counts
- if he can make economic decisions beyond taking/changing jobs a few times in live
- and can get most of his needs satisfied 
- with light out-of-interest work investments 
- leaving enough time for work investment in the area of interest

Jurisdictions do not prevent a slave from becoming an 
independent economic entity

- to organize with others on the same level
- to create economic links (customers and suppliers)
- to follow one's goals
- to control one's own work
- to control the money flows

Still, employment laws are harmful,
as they allow to offer `slave-like employment`_ roles
to which the unaware make themselves available,
thus producing an unfair and immoral market
and removing opportunities for fair cooperation.

Jurisdictions should abandon the concept of employment
and `employment contracts`_ altogether.
Instead of checking for `employment misclassification`_
they should distinguish between 

- transaction-like interaction with `independant contractor`_ or
- sharedly owned cooperation

By `regulations`_ one would have an immediate impact.

Jurisdictions do not demand equality, 
but they do also not forbid it.

`Social security`_ providing a `basic income`_ through `redistribution`_
allows people to avoid unfair contracts
and thus indirectly helps to spread and maintain fair cooperation.
It is also needed due to `automation taking over`_.

Evolution to Ownership
======================

A jurisdiction's negligence to tolerate unfair economic structures
demands for responsibility from those losing in the structure.
Fair cooperation will not be offered by those winning from unfair economic structures.
Those currently in employee roles,
need to offer an alternative to each other
to improve their own situation and thereby reducing inequality.

Every person has his own hierarchy of needs, averaged by the `Maslow pyramid`_.
Individual differences will lead to different cooperations.
People in freedom will try to maximize the satisfaction according to *their* needs.
If the economy does not offer satisfaction, one needs to make an effort and organize it.

Specifically those that need fair cooperation for their `workplace satisfaction`_ need to organize it.

.. _`r_thinkfair`:

Social evolution starts in the heads:

- see inequality as a problem for yourself and the society
- understand your responsibility
- form values and a political opinion
- organize people or join organizations with the same values

Evolution in general needs `long living`_ stuctures to grow upon,
so does evolution away from inequality.

One needs to build infrastructure, where one can work together on the same level,
without a power hierarchy given by the control of the employer over the employee.
There must be only one power, that of the majority.
This is called `workplace democracy`_.
The power must apply only, if *relevant for the majority*.
Inequality is a structural problem of relevance for the majority.

Majority of what? The what does not exist without an organization.
Inequality goes beyond countries, so one must organize beyond country politics.


.. _`r_cooperation_lattice`:

People need to register as an economic `entity`_ (`sole proprietors`_ or sole-member `LLC`_) in their country

- to satisfy their country's laws
- to avoid employment and
- to be independent from any specific cooperation

These entities then cooperate with others and own these cooperations 
directly or indirectly through intermediate cooperations.

The resulting structure corresponds to a mathematical `lattice`_.

.. admonition:: Cooperation `Lattice`_

    In `formal concept analysis`_ (FCA) terms a cooperation is a concept node.
    People constitute the FCA intent of a cooperation. 

    The cooperation nodes form a `partial order`_: 

    - up (owners)
    - down (owned).

    Top nodes consist of one person.
    A further down node is owned by more nodes above,
    because it constitutes their cooperation.

    A node can be sharedly own more futher down nodes,
    i.e. can contribute to more cooperation.

    Control flows downward. Profit flows upward.

    As people are top nodes, no person has control over any other.

.. _`r_inversion`:

A cooperation lattice is an **inversion of traditional company-employee relationship**:
Instead of companies having employees, 
the people own the cooperations in which they work.
In this sense the cooperation is like a `shell company`_.

.. _`r_node_size`:

To allow flat m-to-n communication, 
the size of a node should not be bigger than about 10.
Above that separate `entities`_ should be formed.

.. _`r_legal_entity`:

The `legal entity`_ one chooses is important regarding distribution justice.

- Cooperation must lead to *ownership shares*
- *that stay* with those cooperating and 
- *not have employment-only roles*.

The `cooperative`_ fits best 

- for the cooperation lattice as a whole and also
- for the cooperation nodes

as it does not separate ownership from cooperation.

.. admonition:: Why entity at all?

   People work together to produces an advantage

   - for themselves
   - and others (the market)

   They interface the market via `contracts`_,
   which requires them to be a `legal entity`_.

   They also want to have `rules`:

   - externally via the `articles of association`_
   - internlly via the `bylaws`_

   The whole cooperation lattice on the other hand 
   is a network of shared `ethical values`_,
   legally implemented via an `umbrella organization`_.

.. _`r_bylaws`:

Cooperation lattice bylaws need to require common values:

- ownership by those cooperating (= no employment-only roles)
- democratic decision making where needed (`governance`_)
- no coercions, as contribution is by `free will`_
  motivated by interest and remuneration

It also specifies procedures common to all nodes:

- how work investment is considered in the assessment of ownership
- how ownership changes when exiting a cooperation before done

Sub-lattices and nodes refine common `bylaws`_ of the cooperation lattice.

As a comparison see: `cooperative bylaws`_ and `cooperative alliance`_

.. _`r_lattice_services`:

A cooperation lattice stands for common values
that lead to common processes that need to be

- advertised
- regulated
- mediated
- observed (statistics)
- verified
- automated
- maintained

Processes of nodes are

- becoming an active node
- leaving a node before done
- becoming a done node
- dying of a node

The cooperation lattice is a rational construction
for common value and regulation,
a `long living`_ subsystem, for the nodes
to ease common processes.

.. _`r_lattice_non_services`:

Technical infrastructure on the other
is done by nodes within the lattice.

Nodes do also care to 
recruit new lattice members from outside the cooperation lattice.

.. _`r_advertisement`:

The best advertisement for the cooperation lattice is findable information:
All the values, processes and statistics are public.

If statistics show that the average net income of people in the cooperation lattice
are higher than according work in employment,
this motivates still employees to become 

- independent economic entities and 
- join the cooperation lattice

.. _`r_governance`:

**Written**:
General `governance`_ and `operations`_ are guided by 
written rules, instructions and data: 
`constitution`_, `bylaw`_, `operations manual`_, `SOPs`_, `open data`_, ...

**Transparent**:
Fairness needs to be proven by transparency:
All kind of information of common interest, especially financial data,
needs to be provided to all members of a node or other domain.

**Direct democracy**:
A cooperation lattice and its parts are adaptable via `open legislation`_.
Everybody can create `pull requests`_.
If one wants to change or add something, he can work on a new version,
which then is passed by votes of the owners of the node,
or other applicable domain.

**Locality**:
`Governance`_ needs to avoid situations of potential conflicts.
Decisions that do not impact others are done by the person in charge.
Processes should still be documented, but no acceptance via voting is necessary.
Communication works best inside the brain.

Work split should minimize communication and maximize member freedom.
This is `loose coupling`_ and high `cohesion`_ in programming.

As nodes consist of few members one can still discuss things.
The person with the most information decides in case no agreement can be found.

**Coordination**:
For a project with many nodes a designated `architect`_ node `coordinates`_.
This role is not power concentration, 
but just one of the upper nodes of the project node representing the big project.
Shared ownership protects against power abuse.

**Verification**:
Regular internal `audits`_ verify that 
the written documents (including `accounting`_) describe reality in the domain of their validity.

Employment test, like the `20-factor test`_, within the cooperation lattice
corresponds to **ownership test**.
It should verify ownership is in place, if cooperation is continuous,
and not based on minor, transaction-like contributions.

.. _`r_transactions`:

Nodes do `transactions`_ (sell/buy products/services) 
with other nodes within the cooperation lattice or the market.

.. _`r_ownership`:

Ownership of a lattice node stands for cooperation.
Nodes are sharedly owned by those cooperating
over some time period of legal relevance
else it is a transaction.
Ownership share determines the profit distribution.

The ownership share is based on an agreed key. For example

- work time weighted with education, experience or productivity
- lines of code with debug information for a software project or
- the importance of a component within some complex system

.. _`r_non_exclusiveness`:

Work for one node does not exclude work for another node.

.. _`r_payment`:

Working is an investment that must produce ownership share,
in addition to payment.
Within the company, i.e. within a longer cooperation,
payment is not a transaction in exchange for work
but a side effect of ownership share.

.. _`r_dilution`:

Every new co-worker
justifiably `dilutes`_ the shares in a planned way,
especially those of former co-workers.
If a person/node leaves a cooperation node before done
its ownership accumulated so far stays, but gets diluted.

.. _`r_node_project`:

A node's purpose is a specific project.
Whenever working on a new project also a new node
should be formed, owned by those cooperating.

An upper node initiates a new project or a sub-project

- split a complex product according to `high cohesion and loose coupling`_
- advertise the project or sub-project
- find the right partner nodes within the cooperation lattice
- possibly make additional bylaws and vote on them
- establishing communication channels

.. _`r_done_node`:

When the main work on the project is done
the node functions as distribution channel,
as other nodes take over tasks of different kind

- marketing
- support 
- maintenance

.. _`r_existing_markets`:

A cooperation lattice does not depend on new business ideas.
It can simply compete on existing markets.
Instead of being employee of a company in a profitable market,
one better competes with the company via a fair cooperation.

Unfair companies can shrink

- by competition
- by not finding enough employees,
  as companies not only compete on the product side, but also for employees

More small cooperations produce a better distribution than few large companies.

.. admonition:: Evolution via alternatives

   Alternatives do not necessarily need to replace other forms.
   Today there are 

   - biological species unchanged since millions of years
   - societies one could place hundreds of years in the past

Financing
=========

Many tech cooperations do not need much more than a computer
and that should stay with the personal entity and not be owned by a 
cooperation entity.
The cooperation entity only needs to own what is needed
to fulfill its function.

Smaller expenses can be financed from the owners.

Huge efforts and expensive infrastructure

- can be avoided by `outsourcing`_ productions
- can be a separate `mutual`_ or `cooperative`_
- can be `open development`_ through a large enough community

`Debt`_ can be used for `leverage`_.
This is better than external shares,
i.e. becoming a `public company`_,
as one should hold a share on one's own cooperations
and not of the cooperation of others.

A `cooperative`_ or `mutual`_ are good `legal entity type`_ `choices`_,
as they cannot be sold as one entity.

Funding via selling shares would give a way ownership.
But ownership should stay with those cooperating.

After some time in an ownership network, 
nodes that one contributed to and one thus sharedly owns
should produce enough profit not to depend on external financing any more.

Continuity
==========

The tension in the company-employee relationship produces `employment turnover`_
which produces discontinuity 

- of individual development
- of product evolution
- of economic network

because these are associated to the company, instead of actual people.

If one changes company there is a high chance

- not to work in the field of one's previous expertise any more
- the product left behind will be maintained by people with little knowledge about it
- the economic network of the old company is lost

.. admonition:: Continuity

   `Evolution`_ of complex systems need continuity as a foundation to build upon.

In a technological advanced economy,
complex systems are built and maintained.
This demands continuity to develop actual improvements of components 
instead of random alterations from every new employee working on it.
Even a new approach is better done by someone that has experienced all the shortcomings.

Advantages of ownership are:

- Having none of the `employment disadvantages`_
- Influence on company decisions relevant for all members
- Better share of the profit via company value and via influence on wages
- Security for the future
- Intellectual property stays with the originator
- The expertise stays valuable
- The product gets a continuous development
- Income can be increased by offering to more clients
- More companies and better distribution of company ownership and wealth
- Better income and more time produces a feedback to the actual genes
  (more attractive to the other sex, better care for offspring, ...)
- No power hierarchy, no courting a boss, ...
- Decision right where the information is
- Work according to interest

There must never be someone with to much power, too much wealth, too much leverage.

Especially a young person should become aware of his interests
and develop in that direction without ever letting anybody distract.
If he wants to decide over his actions, employment is no option,
even if it is in the field of his interest.

A problem is, though, that young people do not know yet.
So they are easily exploited by companies.

The reason is the educational system:

- It is `authoritarian`_: students need to obey
- It does not listen to students
- Students cannot develop in a self-determined, independent way
- Students are not taught to care and to be political

Danger of Hype Product
======================
  
A tech product with almost full `market coverage`_

- on the one hand is good, as a `standardization`_,
  as a foundation for new development

- but only if NOT CONTROLLED by one company,
  as that is a `monopoly`_,
  and produces `inequality`_.

`Hype product`_ is not a problem if it was produced

- through `open development`_ and
- the top cooperation entity distributes the profit
  through a hierarchy of sharedly owned sub-entities

`Windows`_ became a hype product via the `PC`_ revolution
and produced an amazing amount of inequality.
`Gnu/Linux`_, on the other hand,
is a moneyless trade of contributions,
but innumerous companies earn good money using it in their products.
It produces less inequality and more freedom:
without a `lock in`_ and the possibility of own adaptations.

.. _`automation taking over`:

In the future, `automation`_ will enter the mass market.
As an extreme case imagine a robot that can take over most work,
cheaper than humans.
This demands for `open hardware`_ and software,
else we all become locked in to one company,
as the complexity does not allow for competition.

Many companies servicing the open automation infrastructure

- make automation faster
- can also better raise money for a `basic income`_
  to distribute resources with other means than work,
  as work is automated away.

Summary
=======

The major statement is that employment leads to inequality::

    Employment = Inequality

Consequently employee's should become independent instead, and offer a fair cooperation::

    Cooperation belongs to those cooperating.

The initiative should come from the employees.

Jurisdictions should make structural change
that have a direct distribution effect,
like abandoning the concept of employment,
instead of only through taxes and `redistribution`_.

.. epigraph::

    What do you do for a living?

    - I make my boss rich.
    - I increase inequality.
    - Effectivley 2/3 of my work is unpaid work for the boss.


.. Contributions
.. =============
.. 
.. If you feel in line with the principle above please fork and create pull requests.
.. 
.. A `meme`_ is regarded to be independent from a specific person
.. such that text can be developed like code.
.. The content should be verified by 
.. 
.. - code that does simulations or calculations on models
.. - actual adoption by groups of people
.. 
.. Content should be:
.. 
.. - motivations, risks
.. - rules for cooperation (bylaws)
.. - conformity with jurisdictions, i.e. countries
.. - development process fitting the network
.. - software (or links to)
..   - for communication infrastructure
..   - client tools
..   - contribution accounting
..   - financial accounting
..   - simulation
..   - verifying that the results of the network are as wanted
.. 
.. The software should automate administration.
.. Governance consists in modifying the algorithms.
.. 
.. Strive for
.. 
.. - consistency in content and naming
.. - minimal redundancy
.. - good cross references
.. 
.. `rstdoc`_ can be used to generated other doc formats from `rst`_.
.. 
.. Currently the content is all in one subdir,
.. to reorganize when needed.
.. 
.. - Text is under `Attribution-ShareAlike createive commons license`_
.. - Code is under `GPL 3.0`_ (Python 3 preferred)
.. 
.. 
.. .. _`GPL 3.0`: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html
.. .. _`Attribution-ShareAlike createive commons license`: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode
.. .. _`rstdoc`: https://github.com/rpuntaie/rstdoc
.. .. _`rst`: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html
.. .. _`meme`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meme 

.. Links
.. =====
.. 
.. Organization
.. ------------
.. 
.. http://library.uniteddiversity.coop/Effective_Organising/Democratic_Company.pdf
..
.. Dachverband
.. ===========
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umbrella_organization
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Source_Geospatial_Foundation
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_in_the_Public_Interest
.. 
.. Law
.. ---
..
.. eGen: https://www.ris.bka.gv.at/GeltendeFassung.wxe?Abfrage=Bundesnormen&Gesetzesnummer=10001680
.. SCE: https://www.ris.bka.gv.at/GeltendeFassung.wxe?Abfrage=Bundesnormen&Gesetzesnummer=20004783
.. http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2009/4/contents
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Payroll_tax
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_tax_rates
.. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/DE/TXT/HTML/?uri=LEGISSUM:l26018&from=DE
..
.. https://www.genossenschaftsverband.de/site/assets/files/30787/5_-_rechtsformvergleich.pdf
.. https://www.genossenschaftsverband.at/gruenderservice/faqs
.. https://www.genossenschaftsverband.at/m101/volksbank/m101_1oegv/de/individuelle_seite/ware/sce.jsp
..
.. Service
.. -------
.. 
.. https://www.usp.gv.at/Portal.Node/usp/public/content/gruendung/ueberlegungen_im_vorfeld/wahl_rechtsform/Seite.1206000.html
.. Gründung: https://www.usp.gv.at/Portal.Node/usp/public/content/gruendung/egruendung/269403.html
.. 
.. Learning
.. --------
.. 
.. https://github.com/daryllxd/lifelong-learning/blob/master/coursera/law-and-the-entrepreneur.md
.. 
.. https://github.com/ritschmaster/HTLanleitungen/blob/master/Jahrgang_5/Betriebliche%20Organisation/Unternehmensrechtsformen/Unternehmensrechtsformen-Praesentation.org
.. 
.. Statutes: Internet Examples
.. ---------------------------
.. 
.. https://github.com/rchain/board/blob/master/2017/08-28/Bylaws.md
.. https://new.siemens.com/global/en/company/investor-relations/corporate-governance.html
.. 
.. https://github.com/lucee/las
.. 
.. https://github.com/pmlaw/The-Bitcoin-Foundation-Legal-Repo/blob/master/Bylaws/Bylaws_of_The_Bitcoin_Foundation.md
.. 
.. https://github.com/gratipay/inside.gratipay.com/issues/72
.. 
.. https://github.com/holacracyone/Holacracy-Constitution/blob/master/Holacracy-Constitution.md#article-1-organizational-structure
.. 
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holacracy
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_governance
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_e-democracy
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Workers%27_self-management
..
.. debian: https://www.spi-inc.org/corporate/by-laws/
.. https://www.spi-inc.org/corporate/annual-reports/2018.pdf
.. 
.. Cooperative
.. -----------
..
.. https://www.vor.or.at/cgi-bin/vor.pl?sid=100004
.. https://www.revision.coop/
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rochdale_Principles
.. 
.. https://een.ec.europa.eu/
.. https://infotrust.com/articles/what-ownership-in-the-workplace-means-to-me/
.. https://www.genossenschaften.de/it-konsortium-gr-ndet-genossenschaft-zur-softwareentwicklung
.. https://www.wir-leben-genossenschaft.de/de/ein-rechtsformvergleich-zwischen-eg-e-v-und-gmbh-349.htm
.. Genossenschaftsrevision: https://www.gbv.at/Page/View/4111
.. Reiffeisen Revisionsverband: https://www.rrv.at/
..
.. http://www.dmlp.org/legal-guide/cooperative-corporation
.. https://www.euricse.eu/
.. http://www.handelskammer.bz.it/de/dienstleistungen/unternehmensentwicklung/unternehmenskooperation/12-regeln-f%C3%BCr-den-kooperationserfolg
..
.. https://www.ica.coop/en/guidance-notes
.. 
.. Inequality
.. ----------
.. 
.. https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1740-9713.2016.00918.x
.. 
.. http://www.wealthinequality.info/wp-content/uploads/ebook/Modeling_Wealth_Inequality_Tobochnik_Christian_Gould.pdf
.. https://www.compadre.org/osp/items/detail.cfm?ID=13337
.. 
.. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/04/extreme-wealth-inequality-alaska-model/
.. 
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mean_log_deviation
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_inequality
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Income_inequality_metrics
.. 
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_in_the_Twenty-First_Century
.. 
.. http://www.shadowstats.com/article/no-325-cpi-ppi-production-household-income
.. 
.. https://ourworldindata.org/global-economic-inequality
.. https://ourworldindata.org/income-inequality-since-1990
.. 
.. Causes
.. ------
.. 
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Causes_of_income_inequality_in_the_United_States
.. https://sevenpillarsinstitute.org/causes-economic-inequality/
.. https://www.quora.com/What-causes-economic-inequality
.. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kuznets_curve

.. _`microeconomy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microeconomics
.. _`macroeconomy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macroeconomics
.. _`selection`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_selection
.. _`ethical values`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_(ethics)
.. _`evolution`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution
.. _`regulations`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regulated_market
.. _`marginal`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marginal_concepts
.. _`economic value`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_(economics)
.. _`maximize profit`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Profit_maximization
.. _`long predate`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emotion_in_animals
.. _`humans`: `eusociality`_
.. _`eusociality`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eusociality#In_humans
.. _`socially`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sociality
.. _`contagious`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emotional_contagion
.. _`co-evolved`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coevolution
.. _`emotional evidence`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution_of_emotion
.. _`empathy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empathy
.. _`egoistic`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psychological_egoism
.. _`inclusive fitness`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inclusive_fitness_in_humans
.. _`prehistory`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prehistory
.. _`selection of groups`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_selection
.. _`employment turnover`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turnover_(employment)
.. _`intra-group`: `intraspecific`_
.. _`intraspecific`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/intraspecific_competition
.. _`solitary`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solitary_animal
.. _`biological competition`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Competition_(biology)
.. _`frame`: `media`_
.. _`media`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Framing_(social_sciences)
.. _`mass media`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_media
.. _`grows exponentially`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_growth
.. _`inequality`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_inequality
.. _`wealth inequality`: https://inequality.org/facts/wealth-inequality/
.. _`distributive justice`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributive_justice
.. _`religion`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Religion
.. _`obedience`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Obedience_(human_behavior)
.. _`virtue`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtue
.. _`work ethic`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_ethic
.. _`ROI`:   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Return_on_investment
.. _`compound interest`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compound_interest
.. _`inequality metric`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Income_inequality_metrics
.. _`mean log deviation`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mean_log_deviation
.. _`geometric brownian motion`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometric_Brownian_motion
.. _`employment`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Employment
.. _`universal Declaration of Human Rights`: http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/
.. _`basic income`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_income
.. _`redistribution`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Redistribution_of_income_and_wealth
.. _`value of the company`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_value
.. _`role`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Role
.. _`bylaws`: `bylaw`_
.. _`bylaw`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/By-law
.. _`centrally planned economy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planned_economy
.. _`sole proprietors`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sole_proprietorship
.. _`cooperation entity`: `company`_
.. _`company`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_legal_entity_types_by_country
.. _`authoritarian`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Authoritarianism
.. _`cohesion`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cohesion_(computer_science)
.. _`loose coupling`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loose_coupling
.. _`coordinates`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_leadership_model
.. _`cooperative bylaws`: http://cultivate.coop/wiki/Cooperative_Bylaws
.. _`cooperative`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cooperative
.. _`cooperation`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Co-operation_(evolution)
.. _`iOS`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IOS
.. _`Linux vs Unix`: https://opensource.com/article/18/5/differences-between-linux-and-unix
.. _`BSD`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkeley_Software_Distribution
.. _`1`: .. _`unix`: https://www.levenez.com/unix/
.. _`2`: http://www.unix.org/what_is_unix/history_timeline.html
.. _`unix wars`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_wars
.. _`Linux kernel`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux_kernel
.. _`GPL`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_General_Public_License
.. _`MacOS`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MacOS
.. _`consumer product`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage_share_of_operating_systems#Mobile_devices
.. _`adoption`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux_adoption
.. _`Android`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Android_(operating_system)
.. _`Linux`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux
.. _`Operating systems`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_operating_systems
.. _`history`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Unix
.. _`PC market`: http://jeremyreimer.com/m-item.lsp?i=137
.. _`MS DOS`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MS-DOS
.. _`Windows`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_Windows
.. _`protectionism`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protectionism
.. _`gitlab`: https://about.gitlab.com/
.. _`github`: https://github.com
.. _`3d`: https://www.3dhubs.com/
.. _`pcb`: https://oshpark.com/
.. _`niche`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niche_market
.. _`protection rackets`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protection_racket
.. _`property`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Property
.. _`social security`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_security
.. _`slavery`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slavery
.. _`feudalism`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feudalism
.. _`entities`: `legal entity`_
.. _`entity`: `legal entity`_
.. _`legal entity`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_person
.. _`immoral`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morality
.. _`economic growth`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_growth
.. _`productivity`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Productivity
.. _`freedom of choice`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freedom_of_choice
.. _`wages`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wage
.. _`economy blog`: `value of a company`_
.. _`value of a company`: https://rolandpuntaier.blogspot.com/2019/05/economy-as-dynamic-system.html
.. _`biological evolution`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution
.. _`economic models`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_model
.. _`territorial claim`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Territory_(animal)
.. _`territory`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Territorial_dispute
.. _`free will`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_will
.. _`coercive`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coercion
.. _`extortion`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extortion
.. _`commands`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planned_economy#Planned_versus_command_economies
.. _`standardization`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standardization
.. _`monopoly`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monopoly
.. _`PC`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personal_computer
.. _`market coverage`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Market_share
.. _`hype product`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hype_cycle
.. _`self-interest`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adam_Smith
.. _`honor`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honour
.. _`hide`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camouflage
.. _`2007-2008 crisis`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_crisis_of_2007%E2%80%932008
.. _`contracts`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contract
.. _`strikes`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Industrial_action
.. _`open offices`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_plan#Evaluation
.. _`imperfect competition`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perfect_competition
.. _`inflation`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation
.. _`governance`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Governance
.. _`outsourcing`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outsourcing
.. _`open development`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_model
.. _`constitution`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constitution
.. _`recession`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recession
.. _`Gnu/Linux`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux
.. _`lock in`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vendor_lock-in
.. _`open hardware`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_hardware
.. _`pull requests`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fork_and_pull_model
.. _`open legislation`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open-source_governance
.. _`SOPs`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_operating_procedure
.. _`mass collaboration`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_collaboration
.. _`collaboratively`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaboration
.. _`ideological`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_political_ideologies
.. _`high cohesion and loose coupling`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cohesion_(computer_science)
.. _`activation energy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Activation_energy
.. _`self-employment`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-employment
.. _`emotions`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emotions
.. _`owner`: `ownership`_
.. _`ownership`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ownership
.. _`open data`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_data
.. _`mutual`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutual_organization
.. _`employee-owned`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_employee-owned_companies
.. _`transactions`: `transaction`_
.. _`transaction`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_transaction
.. _`legal entity type`: `legal entity types`_
.. _`legal entity types`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_legal_entity_types_by_country
.. _`discrimination`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrimination
.. _`increase the price`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Price_elasticity_of_demand
.. _`LLC`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limited_liability_company
.. _`debt`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debt
.. _`leverage`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leverage_(finance)
.. _`public company`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_company
.. _`choices`: https://institute.coop/sites/default/files/ChoicofEntityFinal.pdf
.. _`dilutes`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock_dilution
.. _`labor market`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labour_economics
.. _`employment contract`: `employment contracts`
.. _`employment contracts`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Employment_contract
.. _`unfair`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inequality_of_bargaining_power
.. _`20-factor test`: https://www.wwu.edu/bservices/purchasing/docs/ICvsE_20PointTest.pdf
.. _`independant contractor`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Independent_contractor
.. _`employment misclassification`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Misclassification_of_employees_as_independent_contractors
.. _`slave-like employment`: https://optimalcompliance.com/quiz/
.. _`selection cost`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transaction_cost
.. _`shell company`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shell_corporation
.. _`formal concept analysis`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal_concept_analysis
.. _`partial order`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partially_ordered_set#Formal_definition
.. _`lattice`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lattice_(order)
.. _`slave rebellions`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slave_rebellion
.. _`french revolution`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_Revolution
.. _`october revolution`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/October_Revolution
.. _`WWII`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_II
.. _`workplace democracy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Workplace_democracy
.. _`cooperative alliance`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Co-operative_Alliance
.. _`workplace satisfaction`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_X_and_Theory_Y
.. _`long living`: https://rolandpuntaier.blogspot.com/2019/01/evolution.html
.. _`operation manual`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operations_manual
.. _`architect`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systems_architect
.. _`operations`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_operations
.. _`accounting`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accounting
.. _`audits`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audit
.. _`partners`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partnership
.. _`limited liability`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limited_liability
.. _`LLP`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limited_liability_partnership
.. _`Profit Maximization`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Profit_maximization
.. _`dictatorship`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dictatorship
.. _`communism`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communism
.. _`Politics`: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Political_Theory/Ideologies_of_Government
.. _`articles of association`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Articles_of_association
.. _`umbrella organization`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umbrella_organization
.. _`communication`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communication#Business
.. _`alpha, beta, omega`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alpha_(ethology)
.. _`investor`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Investor
.. _`bullshit-jobs`: https://strikemag.org/bullshit-jobs/
.. _`needs`: `Maslow pyramid`_
.. _`Maslow pyramid`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maslow%27s_hierarchy_of_needs
.. _`interests`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interest_(emotion)
.. _`physics work`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Work_(physics)
.. _`automation`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automation
.. _`artificial intelligence`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_intelligence
.. _`stereotypes`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stereotype
.. _`introvert`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extraversion_and_introversion
.. _`extrovert`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extraversion_and_introversion
.. _`scarcity`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scarcity
.. _`groom`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_grooming
.. _`social grooming`: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rsos.180148
.. _`shares`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Share_(finance)
.. _`corporation`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corporation
.. _`managed`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_management
.. _`funds`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Investment_fund
.. _`companies are owned`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Privately_held_company#Privately_owned_enterprise
.. _`meritocracy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meritocracy
.. _`self-esteem`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-esteem
.. _`occupational stress`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occupational_stress
.. _`finance industry`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_services
.. _`management hierarchy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Management
.. _`public float`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_float
.. _`stock`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stock
.. _`legal industry`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Practice_of_law
.. _`operations manual`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operations_manual
