.. vim: syntax=rst

.. http://rolandpuntaier.blogspot.com/2015/03/what-is-information.html

.. {information}

--------------------
What is Information?
--------------------

This is a very fundamental question that promises insight to all
our intellectual activities and beyond.

The word information is ubiquitous and of course
we know what it means. We would describe it 
as: something that reduces our uncertainty.
Are we happy with suchlike descriptions? 
They use words, which again need clarification,
which again can be decomposed into smaller parts.
As long as you still can abstract away, you are not done.

.. note::

    | First you abstract until you can't abstract no more.
    | Then you synthesize.

Still, we need to start with the natural usage of the word. 
We talk about information in newspapers, in books, in sentences,
in words. 

What is involved? 

- a sender: a person, an animal, our environment,...
- a message: written or spoken text, signs, ...
- a receiver: again a person, a computer, a radio, ...

    This is communication. Is Communication = Information?
    No, it's communication of information.

We need to decompose more: A person has a brain with a map
of our world, with concepts. A message consists of words of a natural language, but it can also consist of
signs, Chinese pictographic characters, hieroglyphs, bits or bytes....

These and other things we can think of, are all quite different. 
Still they must have something in common.

| **They are a multitude** 
| A multitude of concepts in the brain
| A multitude of brain cells, of synapses
| A multitude of phonemes
| A multitude of photoreceptors in the eye
| A multitude of colors
| A multitude of voltages in the radio receiver
| A multitude of frequencies in the radio signal
| A multitude of words or letters or signs in a message

A person as a sender consists of many parts, these parts all
communicate as well.

What is the smallest part of a communication processes?

**Selection from a multitude**

.. note::

    First a multitude, then the selection.
    That's evolution. Evolution is how all dynamic systems work.

- This is how biological evolution works. Selection by environment.
- Economy: supply/demand = creation of multitude;
  publicity, offers, comparison = selection
- The brain: ideas = creating multitude = creativity; 
  selection via comparison with sensory input and experience
- Sciences: papers = multitude; research, studying = selection
- Memetics: ideas communicated to others
- Culture in societies
- ...

We have abstracted everything away and remain with a multitude.
In mathematics the foundation is set theory. The set is what
we so far called multitude.

.. note::

    Where are we now? We have a 

    - **set of elements**
    - **a way to choose or select**

One *instance of choosing* means to choose exactly *one element*.
By selecting one element we *de-select* the others. 
The elements are **exclusive**.

    Regarding choosing or selecting in relation to the set theory
    one might want to check out the 
    `axiom of choice <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_of_choice>`_.

With this exclusiveness added the best words I came up
with are variable and value.

.. note::

    set --> variable
    element --> value

Value and variable turn up everywhere: in programming,
in physics, in statistics,..., because they are the building
blocks of everything: They are information.

.. note::

    building block for information = variable = set of exclusive values

*Value* and *variable* are quite ubiquitous and thus appropriate for
something as fundamental as information.  

.. TODO: extensive variables.

.. In statistics a variable corresonds to the *sample space*.

.. *Events* are subsets of the sample space. 
.. σ-algebra is the set of all *events*.

.. Probability is associated to events.

.. This applies for extensive variables.


Let's get quantitative: What is the smallest amount, we can choose from? The answer: 2.
The important aspect quantitatively is only the size of the variable, also called cardinality.
For a variable `V` I shall denote the size with `|V|`.
It makes sense to use the smallest variable, the **bit** (`B` of size `|B|=2`), 
as unit of measurement for information. 
Values of bigger variables can be mapped to combinations of bits, which are elements
of the Cartesian product. `n` bits can create `|B^n|=2^n` combinations.

.. note::

    The **information** of `V` is how many bits do we need to select a value of `V`. 

Because `2^{\log_2 |V|} = |V|` we get

.. math::
        
        I_V = \log_2 |V|

.. note::

    Information as a measure is a property of a variable, not of its values.

The *occurrences* of values of a variable need to be distinguished from the variable itself.
They make another variable. 
Let's denote this variable with `\bar{V}`. 
To select an occurrence of any value of `V` we need `\log|\bar V|` bits.

The *frequency of occurrence* is yet another variable. Here we look at `p_i = |\bar{V_i}|/|\bar{V}|`.
`\sum_i p_i = 1`. Something like this is called a `probability <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Probability_theory>`_.
The exclusiveness is essential to it. It is a `measure <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Probability_measure>`_.

.. note::

    *Add* probability for *or* `\vee`, but only for exclusive values of the same variable,
    else in general `p(a\vee b)=p(a)+p(b)-p(a \& b)` holds. Note that `p(a\vee b)=p(~a&~b)`.

    *Multiply* probability for *and*, but only for values belonging to independent variables
    else `p(a&b)=p(a)p(b | a)` holds. See `below`_.

One can select values of `V`, i.e. `V_i`, by first selecting an occurrence of any value (`\log|\bar V|`)
and then subtract the excess selection done (`\log|\bar V_i|`): `\log|\bar V|-\log|\bar V_i|= -log p_i`.
Via this selection path one can do with less bits to reference the total amount
of occurrences: `-\sum_i|\bar V_i|\log p_i \le |\bar V| \log |V|`.
Dividing both sides by `|\bar V|` we get the average bits needed 
to select a value of `V`.
It is called `entropy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropy_encoding>`_ (`S`).

.. {entropy}

.. math::
    &S_V = -\sum_i p_i \log p_i \\
    &S_V \le I_V

`I_V` is the upper limit of `S_V`. `I_V` can also be expressed with the `S_V` formula by using a uniform `p_i=1/|V|`.

    `I_V` is the upper limit of `S_V`. Considering that a variable is always embedded 
    in a context of other variables, this limit case vaguely can be interpreted as loss
    of structure.

.. note::
    The entropy is the average number of bits needed to select a value of the variable.

The occurrences of values of a variable are due to the variable's environment (= context),
i.e. its relation to other variables. This context is often
unknown or too complex (= too much information) to describe.
It might also be known and used to derive the frequency of occurrences of values (a priori probability).

Physical systems can be regarded as a huge set of variables. 

There is even a deeper relation between
between energy and information. Check out these links:
- `Physics of information <http://arxiv.org/pdf/0708.2837v2.pdf>`_
- `Statistical physics <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maxwell%E2%80%93Boltzmann_statistics>`_
- `Statistical thermodynamics <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropy_(statistical_thermodynamics)>`_

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

So far information was regarded as inherent to a variable (= a piori).

I continue with the perspective of a learning system, like humans and other
animals or learning machines (computers).

A learning system needs to provide as much memory as there is
in the observed system to fix one state.

But often the learning system is confronted with a system too complex (= too much information)
to create a complete map of it.
It doesn't see all the variables. Most of them stay hidden 
(`latent variables <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latent_variable>`_).
In this situation including the frequency of occurrences of values,
i.e. the probability, is often the best thing one can do.
The probability distribution is a result of hidden dependencies from hidden variables.

    Or it is due to the limited information content of nature itself,
    i.e. due to quantum mechanics. With probability distributions quantum mechanics 
    can continue to use the well known continuum mathematics (real
    numbers,...), although the major statement of quantum mechanics is, that there is no continuum.

In such a complex system it normally is not possible to select a single value of a variable.
Then one resorts to a partial selection via a probability distribution 
for the variable. This method includes also the case of selecting one value 
via a `dirac distribution <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dirac_delta_function>`_,
the entropy of which is 0. A larger entropy expresses
an more imprecise selection or, when talking
about predictions, more uncertainty about what to expect.

For an exactly fixated value of one variable we
often can predict the value of another variable
via a functional dependency. 

.. note::
    Functions are important, because there is no
    information needed to fix the value of the dependant variable.

With an imprecise selection and an imprecise relation,
analytical expressions for dependencies are often not feasible.
Then one resorts to 
`conditinal probability <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conditional_probability>`_:
`p(a|b)` (probability of `a` given `b`),  `a\in A` and `b\in B`.

.. _below:

It is 

.. math::

    p(ab)=p(a)p(b|a)=p(b)p(a|b)

.. note::

    `p(a)p(a|b)` does not make sense.

This is `Bayes Theorem <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayes'_theorem>`_.
It allows to derive `p(b|a)` from `p(a|b)`, i.e. the inverse dependency
(corresponding to inverse function in exact mathematics). 
The starting variable's distribution is the 
`prior <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prior_probability>`_
and the dependent variable's distribution is the *posterior*.

There is a probability distribution for `B` for every value of `A` (`p(b | a)\in p(B | a)`):
`\sum_b p(b|a)=1`. But for `p(b|a)` as a function of `a` 
(`likelihood funcion <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Likelihood_function>`_)
there is no such normalization.
In general `p(B | a_i)` and `p(B | a_j)` can actually be completely unrelated.

Based on theoretical reasoning and assumptions, i.e by creating a model 
(= finding variables and their dependency), one normally ends up
using a predefined distribution, like the normal distribution.
The parameters of such a distribution often need to be estimated 
based on measurements. There are two related methods to do this:

- There is the fundamental
  `principle of maximum entropy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_maximum_entropy>`_ (ME).
  By maximizing the entropy one does not assume more 
  or make a more precise selection than what is actually known.

  Via a `Bayesian inference <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_inference>`_ one gets
  `p(a|\{b_i\})=p(a)\frac{p(\{b_i\}|a)}{p(\{b_i\})}` (`p(\{b_i\}|a)=\prod_i p(b_i | a)`)
  for the (parameter) variable `A` 
  and then one can maximize the entropy of this distribution and take the `a\in A` with maximum `p(a|\{b_i\})`.
  For a uniform `p(a)` this yields the same result as ...

- `Maximum likelihood <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum_likelihood>`_ (ML).
  It selects `a\in A` such that `\prod_i p(b_i | a)` becomes a maximum. 
  
The product (`\prod`) is an assumption that the observed `b_i` values belong to
*independent and identical distributions* (i.i.d).

Here some links regarding ML and ME: 
`1 <http://thirdorderscientist.org/homoclinic-orbit/2013/4/1/maximum-likelihood-and-entropy>`_,
`2 <http://www.cs.huji.ac.il/~shashua/papers/class3-ML-MaxEnt.pdf>`_,
`3 <http://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/4978/comparison-between-maxent-ml-bayes-and-other-kind-of-statistical-inference-met>`_.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

For more on information and probability I recommend these great books:

- `Jaynes <http://omega.albany.edu:8008/JaynesBook.html>`_,

- `MacKay <http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/itprnn/book.pdf>`_,

- `Gray <http://www-ee.stanford.edu/~gray/it.pdf>`_.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Whether values are exclusive in the first place, i.e. are variables, 
depends on the context, i.e. on the values of other variables. 
An intelligent system can find out the exclusiveness by observation.
Only then it can observe the frequency of values with respect to other values
of the same variable. 





